My name is Jesus Montes. And you were born in? Here
in El Paso. I was born here in El Paso. All right, and
your name? It's Bertha Portras Montes. And you
were born? Here in El Paso. All right, I'll begin
with you. Your family, where was your family from?
Well, my father was from Allende, Valle de
Allende, Chihuahua. That's where he was born. And
my mother from Zacatecas. Zacatecas, Zacatecas,
capital of the state of Zacatecas. How did they
meet? My mother was, at the time, after the attack
of Zacatecas from Machovilla, they captured a
city, they had to leave. So they came to Chihuahua
and stayed with some of her relatives there. My
mother got a job working in the hospital. I guess
the way she tells me, it's sort of a nurse's aide.
Now, where in Chihuahua was this? Chihuahua,
Chihuahua. Chihuahua City. Yes, and that's where
she met my father. He was in the hospital
recuperating from a bullet wound. And after that,
he left the hospital in here. Well, how did he
happen to get the bullet wound? Yeah, I haven't got
it clear, you know that? I don't know. My mother
tells me that he was brought in with a wounded from
Salaya. Now, where or how he got it, I really don't
know. What year was this? Do you remember? Oh, it
must have been in, let's see, I think it was 14, 19,
14, 19, 13, somewhere in there. I really don't
know, because I was born in 1918, so I'm just
assuming you know it, because... They were
married about two years before I was born. Must
have been 1914 or 1913. Was your father a soldier?
Yes, he was. He was a soldier.
Of course, I haven't got records on that. Well, not
records, but a few papers that he left. He was a
captain.
He had to leave Chihuahua. after because sort of a
political refugee. Who was he fighting with? With
Villa. With Banjo-Rica? Yeah, but the man that
wanted to hang him was Murguia, General Murguia.
Now, I don't know who Murguia was. fighting for.
See, that's one thing that I've never gotten
clear. It's pretty confusing. People change
sides a lot. Well, I don't know. So many
politicians, they had their own people, powers,
you might call them. And according to my father,
during the revolution, at one time they were
friends, another time they were enemies, so I
really don't know. How did he happen to join Pancho
Villa? Did he ever talk about that? No, no, only
that according to his brothers, he was sort of the
black sheep of the family, you know, the sheep of
the family. He was a rough one, in other words,
because none of the brothers joined the
revolution. He was the only one. And they were
always peaceful and all that. Well, my father used
to read that out.
And I guess that's how he left home and joined the
forces.
I really don't know too much about it, but that's
what I heard him talk about. Well, what was his
background? What had his father been, your
grandfather? Farmer. They were farmers, yes. Did
they have their own land? They had a little patch of
land over in What do they call it? Valle de Allende.
Valle de Allende, yeah. Valle de Allende. It's
somewhere near Parral. That's what I understand.
I've never been that far myself. The farthest I've
been is Camargo. That's as far as I've been into
Mexico. Well then, your father met your mother in
Chihuahua City, and they married there? No, right
after he left the hospital. Right after he left the
hospital. And then how did it happen that he had to
leave? This man wanted to hang him. Well, it seemed
like, you know, we as forces quit fighting or laid
down our arms. And then it seemed like he was
already at peace. And we came to Chihuahua, I
guess, just for a visit or I don't know. And my
father, knew him very well, so he went riding
around in his car. And after Villa left and his men
left, my father stayed back in Chihuahua, and then
Murguia, he started rounding up all the
villistas, or ex-villistas, whatever you want to
call them, and hanging them, you see. And somehow,
I don't know what my father ever told Murguia or
what Murguia had against my father, but he said, I
want him dead or alive. So he had to leave
everything he had in Chihuahua. He had a little
store, and he had to leave everything. According
to my mother, this is what my mother told me, from
Chihuahua they went to Aldama, disguised as the
peasants, you know. And there they got on a train,
it was coming towards Juarez, and that's how they
came right straight to El Paso. And my father will,
many, many years before you, went back to Mexico.
Oh, he did go back to Mexico? Yeah, he did go back to
Mexico. It was always his dream of going back to
Mexico. I don't know. But when he was here, the only
reason he was here was because he was safe. He was
safe here. And what year did he go back to Mexico? Do
you remember? Well, let's see. I was around 14. In
fact, that was the reason my mother separated my
father. She didn't want to go back to Mexico. She
wanted to stay here. And he insisted, and they
insisted, and they broke up. I mean, you know, I
really don't know what happened, but he decided he
wanted to go back to Mexico, so he got this. So what
year were you born? 1918. 1918. And they crossed
the border into the States? Oh, I think... Right
before I was born. So it would have been 1917 or
1918. And how many children were there? In my
family, there was five. Only the youngest, I'm the
oldest, lived. When they were children? When they
were children, yes. And what did your father do
while he lived here in El Paso? Well, he was an
invalid then, because the bullet wound, you know,
he was crippled for life. He couldn't be hired. He
couldn't work for anybody, so he himself made his
own living. He sold vegetables, he sold I don't
know. He'd done so many things, and we were in so
many places. We went out to California, picked
fruit, and a lot of things like that. So you went a
lot. You didn't just stay in El Paso. You went to a
lot of different places. No, no. My father was sort
of a wanderer. He never could stay in one place. And
that was another reason my mother didn't want to
follow him anymore. I had a sister born in
Colorado. My brother was born in California. We
were just all over the country. Mostly picking
crops? Crops and I don't know what else. He did so
many things. But he always worked for himself. He
always had things going. In other words, projects
like a small restaurant or something like that.
What happened when he went back to Mexico? Do you
know where he went? He started farming again. In
the same place? No, down here between Chihuahua
and Juarez, in a place called Villamada. And then
he started getting sick, old and sick, you know,
and so he had to leave the farm. And then came the
Juarez, and he was very sick the last time I saw him
in Juarez, and he said, I'm going to leave Juarez,
I'm going to go to a warmer climate, and I think I can
do well. So he was on his way to the southern part of
Mexico, I don't know where, but he only made it to
Chihuahua City, That's where he died. And what
year did he die? And I wonder, was Alfredo born 50
this year? Bertalicia was... Alfredo was one year
old when he died. Was it 53 then? 52. 52? He died in 53
then. Do you know about how old he was when he died?
Oh, about 64, maybe 64, 65. So he was a fairly young
man during the revolution. Yes, he was. Yes, he
was. I had a picture. What did I do with the picture?
Would you like to see it? I would like to very much. I
don't know where it is. While you're getting the
picture, then I'll start with you. Where were your
mother and father from? My father was from
Chihuahua. Chihuahua City? Chihuahua City. My
mother was from Camaro, Chihuahua. But my mother,
she comes from her father and mother Born in Italy.
In Italy? In Italy. And what were their names
there? Bassanetti, Visconti. And then they came,
I think, when they had only three children, and
then came to Camargo. And my grandfather had a
bakery. That was a part of my mother. But from my
father, they were from the Chihuahua Chihuahua.
And what I hear, there were 13 of them. Thirteen in
your... In my father's. In your father's family.
Brothers and sisters and aunts and uncles and
everything. And they were kind of wealthy.
Mm-hmm. Kind of my father. My grandfather had a...
Well, it wasn't a farm. It was more like a colonia
for non-Muslims. Mm-hmm. And it was 13 ranches
altogether. Outside of Chihuahua? It was in Casas
Grandes. Casas Grandes, Chihuahua, right? They
used to call it Colonia Fernandez Leal. But when
this started, all the revolution and everything,
they had about eight daughters, my grandfather,
see? And he was afraid that something would happen
to them. So the only thing they... They brought
here to El Paso their mattress and whatever
luggage they could take and bring, see? Because
they were afraid of the ballistas. And this is your
mother and father? This is my mother and the side of
my father. Oh. On the side of my father. So they came
over and it was about 1910 they were here. And they
never went back. Now, this is before he married
your mother? Oh, yes. Before he married her. Did
they ever talk? Did your father ever talk about
what it was like? Well, my father didn't used to
talk too much. But my aunt, the one that I had, , she
was the one that got charge of the 13 ranches. She
was the only one left. My father, well, he was an
engineer. And they didn't left him anything.
because he got married, and you know how they were.
This is after he got Del Paso. Yes. Yes, he got
married. But my aunt was the one... Excuse me. Let
me just... What I think I'll do is draw a picture so
that I can get an idea of who's who. All right,
here's your mother, and her name was... Maria.
Maria. And when she... You wanted... Before she
got married. Yeah. Bazzanetti Visconti.
Basenete.
Double T. Yeah. Visconte. Visconte. And your
father was? Jose. Jose. Porres. Porres. Ugarte.
Ugarte. That's right. All right. Now your mother
and your mother's parents We're from Italy, both
of you. And your mother's name was? My what? Your
grandmother on your mother's side. Rosa. Rosa.
Rosa Visconti Bassanetti.
And your grandfather. Carlos. Carlos. Visconti.
I mean, Bassanetti. Bassanetti. Bassanetti,
that's the one. It's not there? And they came from
Italy after they were married. They had three
children. Oh, yeah. They had three children up
there. My mother was one. Did they ever say why they
came from Italy? Well, I think they never... You
see, I was very small when my mother died. I was
about seven years old. I couldn't remember
exactly, but I know they came from Italy. But my...
Now my mother and my father, they met here in El
Paso. Okay, they met in El Paso. And I think it was
that time of 1916, because my brother was born in
1917. All right, how did your mother's family
happen to come to El Paso? Well, you see, they
always used to come here to buy things. Her
clothes, winter clothes and summer clothes,
because they were from El Paso. And that's where
she met. Well, she knew my father in Chihuahua
because she used to go with my mother over there.
And, in fact, my father wasn't even going with my
mother, but with her cousin or something. But when
they came here to buy clothes or something, He was
here because he was here, my father was here since
1910. So they met here and got married and they
stayed here. So her family though, her brothers
and sisters didn't come here. Oh no, no. They
stayed over there. They're still in Mexico. In
Camargo, yes. Who are they now, the brothers? My
mother? Uh-huh. I think there's nobody now. Just
my Tio Rodolfo. That's right, my Tio Rodolfo. He
has a drugstore in Camargo. Rodolfo Bazanete. Oh,
he's alive. He's the only one now. Okay. Rodolfo
Bazanete.
And he's married. Oh, yes. And he has children?
Five girls. And they're all married now. And they
all live in Mexico. They do.
And who were the other children in that family? The
brothers? Of your mother. Well, there's that she
was married to one of her brothers. She's leaving.
She's in another that I have there.
Now, what did her husband do? He was a farmer.
In he has these farms.
And are there any others that are no longer living?
Oh, yes. There was a, well, there's the, like, I'm
the daughter, you know. There's the Juan Camaro
Severo Garza. He has a drugstore. This is a son?
Yes, the son of my uncle. Of your uncle. Severo
Garza. He's dead. Severo Garza. That makes him
dead. Okay. And he has his son now taking care of the
drug store. Severo Garza. And this is in? Camaro.
Camaro.
So all this side of the family stayed in Mexico. Did
they have any trouble during the revolution, or
did they just, they didn't? Well, I don't know, but
they used to tell me that one of Pancho Villa's men,
because on my mother's side, they were kind of
wealthy, you know. There was one, Alberto. that
was killed by one of Pacho Villa's men. And I don't
know if it's true or not, but he never came back
home. Because he used to wear those, how do you call
those? One, they used to wear the man's on their
tie. Jewelry? Yeah, something. Jewelry? Yeah.
And they used to say that one of the men's a poor
shaman. He told him that he wanted that jewelry.
And his uncle said, no, you come and get it. So the
other were just shot. And dead. And dead. And
that's what the end of it. Now on your father's
side, your father's parents, now your father's
mother was? Jose Porras Lugo. Jose. Oh, your
father's father was? Yes, Jose. Jose. Porras
Lugo. Porras. Lugo. Lugo. Lugo. Lugo. And your
mother's, your father's mother was? Exikia.
Exikia.
I can't spell it. No, that's right. Exikia. Q. Q. Q.
Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q.
Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q. Q Porras, P-O-R-A-S. You got it.
You got it. G-A-R-T. De Lugo. This is a name.
P-O-R-R-O-S. Porras. Porras. Okay. Now, your
father's father had a lot of land. Oh, yeah. That
land was given... Porfirio Diaz came to my
grandfather and asked him to lend him some money or
something like that. I don't know what. But my
grandfather gave him money, so Porfirio Diaz gave
him those ranches, the 13 ranches. Do you know how
many hectares it was? It was 180 hectares or
something like that. Each ranch? No, I forget. It
was varied. We had a Max, we had Ed, and I can't find
it. And I have the Porfirio Diaz, everything
that... The signature? Yeah, I have Porfirio Diaz
for mining. I have things, but not for the ranches.
I can't find it. Because by Ed, she used to keep
everything in a little box or something. And she
was very sick when she came down here, when she
died, see? So part was over there and she wallowed,
part was over here. We couldn't get the things that
were in the wall. But I have, if you want to see, yes,
I have this. Oh, surely. And I have a, for a lot of
things, not only, and I thought this was, Now,
what had your grandfather, Jose Perez,
what kind of work did he do before he had the
ranches? Well, I think I can tell you. He must have
had something. Because they were wealthy. I think
they had money.
Okay.
That's right, you know.
citada ley y su reglamento de 26 de junio de 1892.
That's right. It was 25th of June, 1892. Could you
just read the rest of it for me? This is the one that
you want. I don't read it out loud that much. This is
the one you want. This is the one you want. You were
asking about the hectares and everything,
something like that. I think it's there. But that
writing, I'll tell you. It's hard to read. I think
this was a brother of my grandfather,
Celso Lugo.
That's mining.
And here's the signature of
Porfirio Diaz. And here's the signature of
Porfirio Diaz. These are fascinating. I think
what I'll do is maybe just copy these in a few
minutes. Okay. Just fine. But I don't know
what's... When was the date of this? It was... It's
the 25th of June, 1892. Yes, that's right. And
that's when your grandfather... And I was going to
show you another... Because this... I don't know
if I threw them my way. I was so dumb. I don't know.
Because this thing's... You can read the, you read
Spanish? Mm-hmm. Well, it's part of it. This is
what they, talking about the ranches and
everything.
Now, oh, this is, this is in 1931. Yeah, that was my
father, Ingeniero Jose Porres Ugarte. He was
representing my aunts, Josefina and Santiago
Porres Ugarte. But here, the other page, once you
turn this way, this is what starts in St. David.
Because they were having trouble with the ones
that left there to take care of them. And that's why
my father was one. They used
to have a lot of
names.
Here it is.
I can see because my eyes go that way.
Where was I? That
was his name. That
was my uncle. That was my other uncle. I already
forgot them there. Que se encontraban ubicadas en
la Colonia Fernández Real del Distrito Galeán,
Estado de Chihuahua, México. Y por otra parte, por
el señor Simón Parra. He was one of the Mexicans
that stayed over there. Mayor de Edad,
agricultor, vecino de la Colonia Fernández Real,
por medio del presente documento, ha concretado
un contrato, un meeting, con las bases
siguientes. Las señoritas... They agree to rent,
they were going to rent to this man, Simon Parra,
all the land of his property for the duration of
three years. To change from this date, recognized
by Mr. Simon Parra, a fourth of all and each of the
products that are obtained live concretely from
all the land. Thank
you.
Una cuarta parte, that's what they were going to
get, a fourth of everything. That your father
would be getting a fourth. My aunts, not my father.
But he was taking charge. He was representing.
Yeah, that's right. Now, why would it be just your
aunts and your father wouldn't be getting
anything? Because he got married. And when he got
married, he was, how do you say, they didn't
believe when you get married, you just stay by
yourself and forget about the other people.
Because my aunts didn't get married, see? So they
have that to live on. I see. So he was giving up any
rights that he might have in the land so that they
could have it. Now, let's go back and kind of
reconstruct the story. Your father was Jose. And
then he had how many brothers and sisters? Oh, my
Lord. Here, let me correct you. I was thinking
about my grandfather, and his name was Jose Jesus
Maria. And I forgot that. Jesus? Maria. Maria was
your grandfather. And
he's the one that received the land from Refidio
Diaz in 1892. And he had how many children? He had
your father, Jose. There were 13. I don't remember
all of them. I know that there were two Jose's and
two Josefina's. I remember that. Two Jose's. Yes,
because one died when my father was born in Mexico.
Oh, I see. Okay, there was a Jose who died young, and
then there was a Josefina. Josefina, that's the
one they're talking about here. And she never
married? No, none of them married. None of the
girls married, nor the boys. I think your father
was the only one. My father was the only one.
Thirteen children. All right, there was
Josefina. And then was Gregorio. Gregorio, and he
didn't marry? No. What did he do for a living? Well,
he used to have a charge of this hacienda. He had a
store, didn't he? Yeah. When they came here, he had
a store. All right. But he wasn't in charge of the
lands after he came here? No. No, no. They never
went back. Okay. Now, Gregorio, after Gregorio,
then? I don't know. Who was it? Gregorio. Well, put
Maria, that she died here. Maria? Yeah. Now these
people are all dead now. Matilda? They all died.
They're all dead. Matilda? Matilda? She didn't
marry you? No, no, no. The last one was my... And
there was one, Josefina. Another Josefina.
Because they put... Another, because there are
two Josefinas. Maria, Matilde.
Who was the other one? Gregorio. Luis. Luis. Luis.
There was a Luis. How many are there? Maybe I'm
going over, boy. Luis, now what did he do after he
came to El Paso? He had a little store, too. This was
Luis. And he never married? No, none of them. None
of them. Only your father? Only my father. That's
why he didn't have those friends, because he got
married. He had a wife. He had a wife and kids. And
that was my, the one that I remember now, Matielita
Santiago, that was the one that died. How many
years? 11 years ago? Santiago. Santiago. She put
up a battle for those plants. She sure did. Made a
lot of, paid a lot of money out. Go see about this.
And she's the one that really tried the hardest to
get this? Yes. She did. Like nothing. See, because
they even had a, she had a cousin that was a senator
in Mexico City. Uh-huh. And she even went to see
him. Senador Francurias, Francurias. His was a
cousin on your father's side or your mother's
side? On my father's side. On your father's
father's side. That's right. Because I couldn't
tell you about my... Your father's mother? No. You
don't know anything about her? I don't know
anything about her. So how many were they? Well,
I've got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine cousins. I think I missed it. There may
be, but still none of them married. None. And they
all came to El Paso. They did. Now, how old was your
father when he came to El Paso? Do you know?
Roughly. He was born in 1881. And, um, 1881? Is that
right? 1881, that's right. Because he was, he got
married in 1917 or 1916. I think it was 1960 because
my brother was born in 1970. Is that right? Yeah,
he's only a year older than I am. Just a year older. I
think he was about 22 or 23. He would have been about
30. My
father? If he was born in 1881 and he came in 1910, he
would have been about 31. And he was an engineer
already in Mexico. Where did he study? Mexico
City. Was he one of the older children? No, he was
the youngest. The youngest? Yes. He was younger
than my aunt, Lita, who once died about 11 years. So
these children had not married in Mexico before
1910. No. Has there ever been any talk in the family
about why none of them got married? Well, they were
very strict over there in Mexico. They didn't let
her, they didn't let them go out or do this. They
were always home and growing. I don't know what
they were doing, but they were doing something.
One of them was going to get married, Matia
Josefina. In fact, she was the first, she studied
over there at the first secretary for, what was
that big house they have over there in Chihuahua?
It was a Francesa. My aunt used to talk about it. But
I was so small, I couldn't remember. And she was
old. She was very old. But she was one of the first
secretary. In fact, when she got that job, they
were all going to kill her. Or she was going to kill
them, because they couldn't let a lady go out and
work. It was terrible for them, see? But my aunt
said, I'm going to work. Well, when she started
working, it continued. Yeah, this was after they
had come here to the stage. No, that was when she was
over there. That's when she was in Chihuahua.
Because I think they studied there in Chihuahua
from where they were. From the ranchers, they sent
them to Chihuahua to study. And from there, they
all came over here. So this was your Aunt Josefina
that went to work in Chihuahua in spite of her
family. That's right. And your... Your
grandmother and grandfather on your side
actually lived on these ranches. Oh, yes, they
did. And there's Casas Grandes. And then, do you
remember how it was that they came in 1910 or 1911?
What happened in those years that made them come?
Well, I think that they knew that Pancho Villa was
coming. He was passing through there. So they just
came. Never went back. Why were they afraid of him?
Because my grandfather was afraid for the girls,
for his daughters. Oh, was that the reason? Yeah,
that's what they used to tell me. That's why there
were too many. I think there were eight or nine
girls or something like that. So they had to come.
But the boys, I mean, why didn't the sons stay with
them? They were chicken, maybe. I don't know if
they were or not, because with your grandfather
having land given to him by Diaz, he might have been
in pretty great danger in 1911, 1912. In fact, for
many years thereafter, he would have been in
danger. Because they never went back. No, they
never went back at all. Now, when they came to El
Paso, your grandfather, Jesus Maria, what did he
do? To make a living. Well, I think that they put
that store, a big store, that was the one that they
were working all over. And my grandfather was very
old. He was already very old. Very old, see. My
grandmother, and she died over there, and she
walked. She died before... Before coming here.
Before coming. So she didn't come. No, she didn't
come. But my grandfather did. And so all of the
brothers and sisters, did they all live together
when they got here? Oh, yes. They were together.
They were always together. I don't know. In fact,
my Aunt Josefina and my Tia Lita, they used to live
together until they died. Now, the boys had stores
and this sort of thing, the brothers. And the
sisters, did they work at all or did they? They
stayed home. They stayed home. And the brothers
worked and supported the sisters. And none of them
ever married. No. But they weren't real young when
they came here, were they? Well, I think one was 16.
One was 16. Matilda, the one that died over there at
the Providence Hospital. And they didn't even
know what she had, and she had appendix. Maybe your
grandfather may have been born in about 91 and been
only about 20-something if he was one of the
younger children. My father? Yeah, your father.
He was born in 1881 because when they made that...
State National Bank was the same, because he used
to tell me, see, that bank was made when I was born.
That's why I remember that. That's how you
remember them. Yes. They were old, I'll tell you.
They were old. All right. Then your father, what
did he do after he married your mother? He was an
engineer. He had mines here in Mexico City,
Sabinal. Well, this paper says Sabinal. We used to
have mines of gold, plata, and gold and
everything. But your father, after he came to El
Paso, he couldn't work these mines, did he? Oh,
yes. He did? He went back to Mexico? Oh, yes. Oh,
yes. My father was going over, coming. And he had a
partner here, Dr. Hoffner. He had a lot of friends.
And he used to work over in Casas Grandes and his
mines. We had, I don't know, about 10 or 15 mines. We
had money. I know that we had money. When I was
small. Because I used to, they used to, we used to
have three cars and chauffeurs and this and that.
But afterwards... And you lived here in El Paso?
Oh, yes. And he kept on working as an engineer. Now,
during the first days of the revolution, what year
were you born? In 1921. In 1921. Was he already
going back to Mexico to work in the mines? Oh yes, my
father, yes. He went all along, all through the
revolution. Yes. Was he ever in danger or
anything? No, I don't think so. My father, he used
to come and go and nothing happened to him. But he
never used to go near his ranches or things, no. He
just never did go near those ranches. No. He used to
write like that, like that, asking for somebody
would go and see about him. But he never went back.
Who did your grandfather leave in charge of the
ranches? Well, the ones that they have over there,
the peones or... Yes, overseers. I think he left
overseers. And then he gave, I think, what I
gather, he gave them power of attorney. And all
they had to do was, after the harvest, after
everything was sold, they would keep part in St.
Paul. St. Paul, here to El Paso. It was every other
year they did.
After a while, they quit sending anything. They
were just complaining of having bad years. Bad
years that went after another, went after
another. They just never heard from them again.
They just took over. They probably got papers on
the line or something like that. Claimed them.
There are all kinds of things I want to ask you in a
minute. I'll go ahead with your family. Now, your
father continued going back to Mexico. And how
many children did your mother and father have?
Three of us. There were three of you. Who was the
oldest? Mario. My brother Mario. Mario? Four of
us. Did he marry? Oh, yes. Who did he marry? Berta
Chapone. From here? Yes, ma'am.
And they had how many? I have a doctor. That's
Mario.
Just tell me what they do, as you name them. Mario,
he's a doctor. Mario, a doctor. Tito, he's an
electronics. No, I think he's in computer
analysis. That's right. Where does he live?
California. Mario? You mean the doctor? All
right. Mario lives in... In Albuquerque.
Albuquerque. And he's married. Yes, he's
married. And has... Just one kid. One kid. Dito
lives in California. He's not married. He's not
married, and he's a computer... Yes.
Technologist. And then there's Armida. She's a
registered nurse. Is she married? Yes. What does
her husband do? He was in the Army. Well, he was in
the service. In the service. What was his name? Do
you know? He just got married. And she just married
him? Yes. And then there was... And then, well, in
fact, it's Armida and Armando. They're twins.
Armando, he's married. But I don't know what he's
studying or what. I think he's still in school. I
don't know. I believe he is. I'm not sure. He was...
Probably still in school. And David. And David.
He's the youngest, and he's not married. He's
going to college. He's going to college. And where
is Armando going to college? I think in Los
Angeles? Somewhere in the United States. In the
United States, I don't know where he's going.
Where does Mario Senior live? He lives in San
Bernardino. In San Bernardino. And what does he
do? He's a field executive for American National
Insurance.
All right. And then there is? My sister Rosa. Rosa.
And is she married? Oh, yeah, four times. Four
times? Oh, yeah, four times, yes. Oh, my goodness.
Yes, she's a busy being. She certainly is. Which
one of the husbands do you want? Oh, I don't know.
Well, the first one, she got married over there in
Mexico, see? In Mexico? Did she go back to Mexico?
Oh, my sister? Oh, she used to travel a lot. She
traveled back and forth a lot. She used to work with
a lawyer, see? But one of her trips, in her vacation
trip, she met this guy in Mexico. Zacatecas, was
it? I don't know. So they came over. She got married
here. But he was from Zacatecas. And he wanted to go
back to Mexico, and she didn't. She just called it.
He was already married. I don't know about that.
That's what they told me. I don't know. He was
already over there marrying, and they were living
here in Los Angeles. And then my sister said, you
better go to your land and leave me alone. Mm-hmm.
Then she got married with Benny Fregoso. And they
had four children. Oh, they had four children.
And where are these children? They're in Los
Angeles. They're all in Los Angeles. Jose. Jose.
Cristina.
Jorge. Javier.
Javier.
And what do they do? I think Jose. Jose's in the
service. In the service, yeah. And Cristina. And
Tina is working. And Jorge, they're in school.
They're in school. High school or college. And
then what happened to this husband? He's from Los
Angeles. He's retired now. He's retired. He's an
old man. He was older than her. And then she married
again. Yeah. Then she married again. She divorced
me. Then she married again. That's what I heard. I
don't know if it's true or not. Oh, you don't know
her. That's what your brother told us. Yeah,
that's what he told me. But you don't know her third
husband? No, I don't know her third, nor her
fourth. Nor her fourth. You don't even know if she
had any children. No, I don't think so. Because
she's older than I am. I don't think so. The
children with her? Oh, yes. Then there's you. No,
yes. Us. And you're married to... Excuse me. I
have the same thing as her grandpa, but I never use
it because I don't like it. What do you call
yourself? Jesus.
Oh, Jesus Maria. You don't mind Jesus, but you
don't like to be Maria. Jesus Maria.
All right, and you have how many children? Nine. My
goodness.
And three in this carriage. I better make a new page
for your children. And
this tape is just about to run out. Before I go on.
With your children, let's see, there was one more
question I think I wanted to ask. Oh, your father
and mother, how long did they, when did they die? My
mother was the one that died in 1932. And my father
died in 1945. And
what year did you marry? 1945. 1945. November the
25th. And you met here in El Paso? Oh, yes. And was
your father, did he remain wealthy as long as you
were at home? You said you remember being wealthy.
Well, because on account of his work. And the three
cars and everything? Yeah, on account of his work.
But afterwards, something went wrong. My mother
died, and everything went wrong for my father. His
mines and everything started... But he was always
busy making maps and this and that. Did he stop
going back to Mexico after your mother died? He
still went back, but the mines just didn't work out
as well.